person.
>> Good evening. We're going to call the uh
town of Vandover
March 17th public hearings to order and
um I guess we'll get right to it. Um
we'll start with the application 26-1
SP.
uh application of Thomas and Elizabeth
uh Thomas Hurst Elizabeth Pollson at an
accessory apartment above the existing
farm store
and go ahead.
>> Hello, I'm Elizabeth. Um I'm
representing my parents and Sherry
Hurst. Um we're looking to put an
accessory apartment in the second floor
of our farm store, which is an existing
attic right now. Um, you can see the
store on the center of in in the cross
there on the center of the plan. Um, if
we go to the next page, we can see kind
of what we're looking at in terms of an
apartment.
>> Is there anything?
>> I don't think there's anything
particular on the site plan other than
knowing really where the story is. Um,
unless anybody has any questions
about that.
>> Well, we took this from the uh
um
engineering drawings that were sent to
us by the cell phone company and those
of the details
uh for the property there. She's not u
adding any buildings. She's using
existing building. So
that's
without see. Is there any way
that we don't? Uh yeah.
Uh this I can't say
scroll down just a little bit so that
you can see the weapons.
What we're looking at currently is the
second floor of our store building and
stairwell up on the left. As we come to
the stop at the top of the stairs, we're
going to keep that storage. Um, and then
we've marked out where we're looking at
having the accessory department. We've
already put in a septic system. We've
gotten the okay from the Eastern
Highlands Health Department to do this.
Um,
you know, it's it's we're looking at
doing this because, you know, we all
know that farms are they take a lot of
extra hands. I was one of nine children.
A couple of my siblings are hoping to
move back and sort of help out with the
farm, raise their raise their children
there, and my sister is looking to move
back. So, this will hopefully be for my
sister. You know, it helps them, helps
us.
So this is all storage for the farm
store.
>> That's yeah
>> because the accessory apartment has a
limit to how big it can actually be. So
what we've done is we've made it so that
the dimensions fit within what we're
allowed to do for the film. Otherwise we
probably would have just
>> So I saw one of the photos had a doorway
from coming to the outside. One of the
external photos. Yes. So,
>> and I didn't see how that fit into this
picture if
>> No, I
some of them. So, if you look at the
stairwell on the left hand side, that
door is at the bottom of the stairwell.
So, we were told we have to put in a
separate entrance
for the apartment. They can't they can't
access it through the store building,
like the main entrance of the store. So,
it will be at the bottom of that store,
which I think we have a picture um that
shows where it will exit on the front of
the store.
Yeah. So, we just kind of white it out.
That's it's currently a window. We'll
just remove the window and put a door
there so they can
building.
>> And was the kitchen going to be, you
know, a full standard kitchen, sink,
>> sink, stove, refrigerator, small island,
some
>> more than a microwave?
>> No, more than a microwave for sure.
>> For sure. I think that they're looking
to live here, you know, for for
an undetermined amount of time.
>> And how is it going to be heated?
>> Uh there will be a plet stove and a wood
stove
upstairs
>> which are currently up there because we
do heat the store with wood pellets. So
that's already installed.
>> Okay.
>> And the septic is it's a new septic.
It's a new septic for the the store
itself, which on the site plan I did
mark it's out in front of the store. Um,
and we put that in 2024.
>> And so you have all the uh
stuff from Eastern Highland.
>> Yes. And they have approved that it's
that the apartment is within the
parameters of the subject to be added.
There's there's Easter Island's letter.
>> So, it's my understanding that
a few years ago you connected the store,
>> right,
>> to the septic system with with the
intention of
>> right
>> and now you're getting to the to the
actual we want to the apartment, right?
Excuse me.
>> Plenty of parking.
>> Yeah, I was up there last week with
plenty of parking.
As far as the square footage, it fits in
with the 33% of the
well the primary dwelling.
>> I think the only odd thing about it
maybe from the the normal in that it's
not attached to the house.
That's the plan is still to use it for
family. It's not really I know it was
called the market rate class department
but we're not planning on using it out
just
>> um I will note that uh they have
requested a waiver for the A2 site plan
>> for the sorry
>> for the A2 site plan. Okay,
>> that's on file here. Um,
this is the checklist.
And here's a waiver request right here.
Don't know. Is there anything else you'd
like me to show the commission out of
this?
>> I don't. Is there anything else you
would like? I uh I put into the into the
satellite view of the of the farm.
>> We did also have
>> plenty of room.
>> They are going to start they're also the
cell tower is going to be started pretty
soon, isn't it?
>> Yeah. They're um they're today. They're
thinking maybe the middle of May um if
everything goes, you know, I
>> see they put in for their building for
Yeah.
cell phone towers going under the bar at
the rear of the property along the
bishop sw
the line the they have a boundary kind
of the bishop's one so it's going to be
way back
is there any commission
Yeah. Any other questions from the
commission?
Anybody get online?
>> Okay.
>> I think I think I'm all set.
>> I'm all set.
>> Thanks.
>> Sounds good. Yes. Ask any questions for
the public.
>> Thank you for the reminder. There any
questions from the public online
present?
I do have a letter,
>> okay, to be read a letter of support to
be read into the file.
It's from Edward and Ver Valerie
Gerardi. U she came in this morning and
hand delivered this to me asking that it
be read into the record. I Mr. Wood
um I'll paraphrase
the letter itself is is
if it's not online but it'll get there.
Um
basically they are they are supporting
this uh this proposal
um as a as as an asset to their property
uh to make the area more functional.
and um
she's quite uh quite a few accolades
about the the property itself and the
first family.
So
I think for for the commission's
purposes this is very supportive of
their proposal agency. That's great.
>> Um, any other questions from you that I
that
>> No, I I've reviewed it. I I can't find
any uh any defects in the application.
So, that's that's my report on it. It's
got the square footage. It's got the
health district. It's um
it's got a site plan. Just got a um
floor plan.
Not much else involved.
>> Oh, sounds good.
>> Yes, that's it.
>> Motion to close the hearing.
>> Yes.
>> Um for a motion to close the hearing.
>> I'll motion close the hearing.
>> I need a motion. just ask if anybody
wants to keep it open.
>> Does anybody want to keep the whole
hearing open?
>> Thanks, Jed.
>> Okay, hearing none, I will close the
public hearing.
>> Thank you very much.
>> So, at this point, um it the um there'll
be there's another public hearing coming
up on the plan conservation and
development. After that, the commission
uh is going to
they don't have to to vote on this
proposal tonight. It's going to be up to
the commission what they do, but during
the regular meeting, they will decide
what they're going to do. If they're
going to consider this today or push it
off, if they consider it today,
if you want to hang around,
>> there's a nice picture of the Hurst farm
in our I know it's in our plan.
Okay, thank you very much.
>> All right, right along to plan of
conservation and development and I'm
going to hand the floor to John
Kuscowski, our town planner.
>> Thank you, Mr. Chair.
>> Very welcome.
Um I will bring up
PowerPoint
um
that hopefully will look something like
presentation.
Okay. Um thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the commission. For the record, my name
is John Gusowski. I'm the town uh
consulting planner for the town of
Andover. and uh with my firm Titan
Planning and Policy Group. We help
develop help the commission develop this
plan of conservation development update
for the town of Andover. Um I'm going to
do just a short a short presentation and
happy to answer questions after that.
Um, for those who are not familiar with
the process, a plan of conservation
development or POCD
is a document that is required by the
Connecticut General Statutes,
specifically section 8-23 of the
statutes that requires that every
municipality in the state at least every
10 years um update and adopt a new plan
of conservation development. This is an
advisory document that is um prepared
and adopted by the planning commission.
Uh in this case, Andover like many towns
has a joint planning and zoning
commission, but the statutes charge this
to the planning the planning half of the
planning and zoning commission. It is
their responsibility. It is not um a
document that is voted on by the
selectmen. It is not a document that is
voted on in referendum or by town
meeting. It is the responsibility of the
planning commission to develop it. um
statutes have a number of things that
that the plans must consider. Um sort of
the usual things that you would imagine
when you're thinking about a 10-year
projection into the future. what land
use is going to look like, affordable
housing, drinking water and wastewater
disposal, physical, social, economic
trends like where have we been, where
are we going um in terms of our
populace, community needs, energy,
preservation of agriculture, um
technology and as well as sea level
concerns and and climate change have
been added to um our responsibilities a
couple of years ago. So, all of these
things need to be basically considered
and weighed and planned for over the
over the 10-year period. And I apologize
the the um font is funky um on this the
translation and the font. So, bear with
me here. Um how are plans used broadly
speaking? um they are used for by by the
planning and zoning commission to
determine uh regulation amendments and
how the town should be zoned and planned
for. Um so for instance if we in the
plan decide oh we really need more
manufacturing or more industrial land
that would then um cause the planning
and zoning commission later to say all
right where are areas in town that we
should change their zoning maybe from
residential to industrial because we
decided we wanted more industrial.
That's an example. We didn't say that
this in this this case, but that's the
the um the the goal of the plan the the
plan of conservation development is to
guide municipal decisions. It also at a
at a bigger scale guides municipal
decisions when it comes to investment um
in infrastructure, investment in land uh
divestment in land by the town. So if
the town was going to extend, you know,
so a water line, a public water line
from Willamantic or something like that
and an investment, you know, what would
be millions of dollars, the plan of
conservation and development has to be
resulted and and and the planning and
zoning commission has to be asked. The
town is thinking about making this
investment or let's say we're buying a
piece of open space and using taxpayer
money to do so. Um the planning and
zoning commission has to be asked the
question does this investment match with
the goals of the planet conservation
development. Ideally it does. If it
doesn't that actually forces essentially
a veto override by town meeting or
whatever entity is going to be approving
that that plan. Um so so it is a very
important consideration relative to
municipal investments. If we're seeking
grant money, particularly from the state
or federal government, they really
really like to see that the thing you're
applying for, again, let's say it's a
piece of open space or or watershed land
or something like that, um, matches your
plan of conservation development. If the
town if the plan says, "Oh, we're all
about industrial development here," and
then the town turns around and say, "Oh,
we'd like a million dollars to buy a
piece of open space." The state's going
to say, "Wait a second. That's not what
the plan says." Um, and and it might not
look favorably. So it really behooves
the town to put in their plan the stuff
that they actually want to do, the open
space that they actually want to invest
in, the infrastructure that they
actually want to invest in, and that
will help in terms of um in terms of of
seeking uh that sort of government
funding. Um the plan also has to
coordinate with uh the regional and
state versions of the master plan. The
state has a five-year plan called the
state uh conservation and development
priorities plan. Um and the capital
region, which is the 30 something towns
around the greater Hartford area, which
includes Andover, has a regional plan.
That's a snapshot of the regional plan.
Um and as part of our process, we
reviewed both the state plan and the
regional plan to find areas of harmony
and disharmony. And broadly speaking, we
are we are pretty harmonious. Generally,
the reason we're we're harmonious is
that the state and the cog, the council
of governments tend to actually defer
pretty strongly to the the local plans.
We are we are we tend to be Connecticut
tends to be sort of a grassroots
municipal planning up um approach.
That's changed just slightly over the
last couple of years, but broadly
speaking, um the the the state and the
COG plans tend to be pretty diffial
to municipal plans.
Um, how did this plan actually get
developed? We've been working on this
Jed for two years now or so.
>> Yeah, good year and a half.
>> Um, we uh the last plan um was adopted
in 2015, so we're just a slight bit
behind schedule on that, but we've been
making progress and the state is aware
of our progress. Um, the town uh
advertised for um a consultant to help
with this and my firm was selected. Um,
as part of that whole discussion, it was
decided that we would be assisting with
my firm would be assisting with stuff
above and beyond the plan of
conservation development. So, in
addition to working on this plan for the
last year and a half, two years, we've
also been working on grants and and and
projects um to assist the the um the
town manager, the town administrator and
and planning and zoning commission.
Um, we saw a couple of slides ago that
there's a bunch of stuff that the plan
has to consider, open space and and
sewer and water and housing and things
like that. There is no um defined
process for how a plan gets developed
and adopted at a at a local level. Town
can do sort of whatever they want. A lot
of towns will um appoint, you know, a
little a little ad hoc committee with,
you know, someone from planning and
zoning, someone from selectment, someone
from conservation, someone from economic
development, all go in a room and and
and write the plan. Um some towns will
just hire someone to go go write the
plan, come back when you're done. Other
towns will the planning and zoning
commission, which is what happened in
Andover, decided to have a committee of
the whole so the entire planning and
zoning commission would be participating
in writing this plan. And so what we've
done over the last 18 months or so um is
we've taken this sort of section by
section, chapter by chapter and and
produced um updates that the commission
has been reviewing at its plan at its at
its regular meetings. We also um
conducted an extensive community survey
um both online and in hard copy that
asked all sorts of questions about
different priorities and and whether you
know people found that the the the
school was a more important investment
than the senior center or that the the
um the uh transfer station was more
important than public works or that town
administration was more important than
parks and wreck. we we sort of um add
added some of these these questions
about priorities and and the type of um
town that people would like to see. Ask
people about their concerns, ask people
about their hopes. Um and we
incorporated a lot of that input into
the plan. We started from a vision and
we'll we're going to put the vision
statement up on the screen in just a
second. That was sort of the broad
statement about what we would like
Andover to be over the next 10 years.
And then the components of that vision
were then broken down into the
substantive chapters, the thematic
chapters um that again were based on
stakeholder input. So when we started
talking about conservation issues and
natural resources and open space issues,
we engaged um the conservation
commission um who were very very active
and had a lot of brought a lot of good
ideas um and and maps Hank uh to the
table. When we talked about business
growth, we we we um interfaced
extensively with the economic
development commission and so on and so
forth. So each topical um area was was
included was was incorporated with um
stakeholder input for those folks that
knew the most and cared the most about
those topics.
A couple of things and we're all you're
all Andover residents here, so I'm not
going to get too deep into this, but an
important part of figuring out where
we're going to go is to really
understand who Andover is, what our
demographic makeup is, and what some of
the the gaps are. And I again, I
apologize for some of the formatting in
this. The the font didn't really
translate. Um, so we're, you know, a
small town of about 3,000 people. Uh,
relatively well to do. Um, the median
household income over 120,000 with a
very low poverty rate. So in comparison
to a lot of the communities in the in
the area or certainly statewide, Andover
is doing relatively well um fairly well
educated populace uh where you've got,
you know, nearly a quarter of your
population has a master's degree or
higher, which is which is very highly
educated. Um but and and again not
surprise to anybody we have relatively
high home values. Um and this is this is
a you know a single family uh owner
occupancy community. 94% owner occupied
which is extraordinarily high. It's it's
one of the highest owner occupancy rates
in the state.
Um and that I think contributes a lot to
the stability of the community because
that there's you know the vast majority
of people are are really grounded and
rooted here in Andover. um our economic
status. The middle map kind of shows you
the inflow and outflow of jobs. Again,
surprise to nobody. Andover is not a job
center. We tend to be a veteran
community and most of our working
population is leaving town. We have of
of the 3,000 odd people. More than half
are leaving the town every day to work.
Um and that you know that number like
that that's that's a gross number. So
basically most working people are are
leaving the town to to find work. Only
92 people both work and live in Andover.
Um the gap and then there's a bunch of
you know people who are either children
or retired or they're not in the in the
workforce.
Um a little snapshot of some of the
major you know that network is that
considered a government job or is that a
private employer? network even private
employer. I mean it's possible major
customers are mental but yeah
>> no I still you know I still struggle
trying to figure out how we've got 304
government jobs in Andover.
>> Well that's those are I think the the
jobs of the the the sector that the
people in town work in whether or not
it's in town. There are there are 300
people in government working in or from
from Andover. So that's that's Yeah,
it's it's not Andover jobs, it's the
jobs of the people from Andover, if that
makes sense.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. Um, so this is going to be a
little bit more difficult to read
because
uh Okay, I'm I'm going to read it from
my laptop.
So um I'm going to indulge me here. It's
it's
uh the vision statement is kind of an
important framing document for the whole
plan. So with your indulgence, I'm just
going to actually read the the vision
statement as a whole. Um because I think
it's an important statement that the the
community is making.
See?
Okay.
I invite you to close your eyes and
think of Andover if you'd like. The town
of the town of Andover Planning and
Zoning Commission in developing this
update to the 2015 plan of conservation
and development is guided by a deep
commitment to conserving and enhancing
the historic rural atmosphere of Andover
and by the intent to promote actions and
policies that will encourage a more
welcoming, connected, and sustainable
community where opportunities for growth
are available to all. A fundamentally
rural agricultural nature has defined
the community of Andover for centuries,
and it continues to be a critical
component of the town's self-identity as
it faces the next decade. Making
investments in the conservation of
forests, farms, trail systems, and open
spaces will help reinforce this spirit.
At the same time, certain elements of
change must be acknowledged and used to
guide appropriate growth. An aging
population and infrastructure, limited
housing and economic development, and a
changing climate also demand proactive
plans and active responses.
We envision, and this is okay, I'm going
to go to the next page here.
This is the core of it. We envision an
Andover that provides economic, housing,
educational, recreational, and civic
opportunities that maintain the
community's excellent quality of life.
We envision an Andover that strives to
create more affordable housing to
welcome a wider variety of new residents
and households and ensures opportunities
for residents to thrive throughout their
life stages. We envision an endover that
safeguards the integrity of our
agricultural, natural, and historic
resources through sustainable
conservation.
We envision economic development that
takes advantage of major transportation
and rail corridors and is scaled to fit
with the spirit and pace of Andover.
We envision a safe and vibrant Andover
that connects the community through a
network of complete streets and enhances
the town's civic campus on both sides of
Route 6. At its heart, we envision civic
investment that acknowledges and plans
for a changing climate and the need for
equity for current and future residents.
The next decade in Andover will continue
to enhance the civic campus on both
sides of Route 6 as the heart of our
community while integrating thoughtful
development in surrounding areas and
throughout the town. Strengthening safe,
vibrant, and inclusive connections among
all areas of Andover balanced with
conservation and natural balance of
conservation and natural and cultural
resources are essential to the
realization of this vision. So that's
what we want to do in this plan.
Each of those statements there are six
of them became the heart of um topical
chapter in in the plan itself. So the
chapter is then structured once the
vision is established in each of those
we envision statements.
So the first one is
the excellent quality of life in
Andover.
In each of these guiding principle um
sections, first being quality of life,
we broke this down into broad goals for
what the the what should happen to help
enhance the quality of life or the other
guiding principles. And so in quality of
life, we're seeking to uh continue to
provide public safety for residents,
workers, and visitors. Continue to
preserve the scenic and historic beauty
uh that's cherished by residents and
visitors. supporting and encouraging the
high quality of of education that
Andover students of Andover students
through well-maintained and updated
school facilities to manage and maintain
parks and public lands for the continued
enjoyment of Andover residents and um to
protect them from climate change impacts
and lastly to foster and encourage new
and expanded services for senior
citizens. So these are the things that
we recognize are important to Andover's
continued high quality of life.
um in each chapter
in addition to sort of laying the
groundwork and describing there's a lot
of narrative in each chapter that
describes a high quality of life and
breaks down the you know our our school
system breaks down our open space and
our recreation opportunities. So this is
this is just sort of the snapshot. And
at the end of each chapter, those goals
are further broken down into specific
action items, specific recommendations
for the things that the town should do,
steps that the town should take to help
ensure that these goals are reached over
the next 5 years.
Um so the guiding principles for housing
opportunity which is our second we
envision statement are to include are to
ensure adequate housing for individuals
of all ages and incomes that's available
within Andover with a focus on a long
residents to age in town and young
adults to remain in town and grow their
families which is something that we saw
repeatedly that young people are forced
to to leave town because they can't find
adequate housing. um seniors don't have
adequate places to move into and are
sort of stuck in houses that are too big
um for them to maintain as they age. Uh
so finding opportunities for all of
those those things are important. We
want to allow for a variety of types of
affordable housing. Um incre including
accessory apartments, that's that's a
key part of this. um increasing the
number of affordable housing units
through incentives and density bonuses
where it's appropriate and to encourage
additional housing in locations near
existing services and transportation
options. So that that's that last one is
sort of a a non-spal. If you're going to
increase the activity, it should be in
those places that there's already
activity, places where you can get to
schools, you can get to jobs, you can
get to town hall and the library and the
recreation facilities and and not
scatter people into the winds. um where
it's really hard to get from one place
to another. So that's housing. The third
was about conservation.
Um and the goals here were to aggregate
tracks of land to create large intact
conservation areas and open space
corridors to promote connectivity of
open space parcels within the open space
corridors. where we want to make sure
that the the open space and conservation
areas communicate with each other not
only for people but particularly for for
wildlife as well to protect our natural
resources including air, water, soil and
diversity of native plants and animals.
promoting a public uh awareness of the
natural resources and the value of open
space because an educated public about
these these natural resources is is
really critical to the efforts to
protect them and to engage the community
in conservation initiatives and support
recreational opportunities where it's
appropriate. So the best, you know,
among the best ways to get people um to
to be conservationists is to get them
out in nature and make them understand
and appreciate what they're seeing.
as part of particularly the natural
resources and conservation chapter.
Again, we're we're very indebted to um
to Hank Gruner and Maryanne Gile um who
who provided extensive mapping support
um and identified sort of key areas in
in a number of in a number of resources,
our water resources, our air resources,
soils, wildlife um and all of those
things are are very important to
understand where they are and how these
natural resource systems work together.
We identified several um key open space
corridors that we're trying to um build
upon. And so, you know, the the question
is, all right, well, we're going to, you
know, try to get a grant some open
space, right? Where do you want that
open space to be? And so, um we've part
of what was being done, uh working with
the conservation commission is to
identify some of these key corridors and
obviously the eastern highlands, western
highlands, and particularly the hop
river corridor. um which is which is a
key natural resource. Of course, the hot
river corridor will also come up um in
our next discussion which is economic
development.
Um and so the goals in in economic
development again is to grow the uh
Andover's grand list by providing
additional development opportunities. Um
consider and promote housing as economic
development again because recognizing
that Andover is a very small community
that is primarily a bedroom community.
Um, we're not going to turn it into
Silicon Valley overnight. We're not
going to turn it into the Berlin bike
ever. Um, but and so, so what are their
assets and and what kind of economic
development can we can we um attract?
The fact that Andover is an extremely
attractive um bedroom community and it's
very stable community.
more housing um is is an appropriate way
to to um grow economic development and
promoting tourism uh by making Andover a
destination through uh again with with
promotion of the hot river, promotion of
agurism, ecoourism, the the hot river um
trail corridor. All of these things are
are um assets that can be that can be um
promoted for economic development
purposes.
The what are we on? That's one, two,
three, fifth. Now, um guiding principle
is complete streets. Uh which was a
particular passion of our um town
administrator who who departed during
the uh drafting of this plan. Um is to
make sure that Andover is a safe place
to navigate and a safe place to
circulate around. So, the town um should
be uh making changes to its roads to
make them more safe. And there's a
variety of methods that we go through to
do this in terms of maybe more um
widening shoulders or changing the
striping of of uh roads in certain
cases, adding sidewalks, adding
multi-use trails and and making the
crossings of multi-use trails across
existing streets safer. And then to that
line, we should we should pursue safe uh
trail upgrades to provide um safer and
more efficient use of our existing
trails. We should be pursuing sidewalks
and multi-use trails and identify
locations to encourage walking as a safe
um path. And particularly when we talked
about the route six corridor being, you
know, bisecting kind of the the key
campus areas. Obviously, we're in the
sort of the the northerly part, no
southerntherly part of the campus right
now. um and with the the um the library
and churches and the recreation facility
on on Longill,
these are sort of two key parts of our
civic campus, connecting these things
together conveniently and safely across
all modes of of transportation is a
really important goal. And so knitting
the the sort of the heart of the town
together through through um bike,
pedestrian, and and other transportation
means is a key goal. And then the town
should continue to um focus on public
awareness regarding bike safety,
resident uh resident trooper visibility
and speed enforcement. So making um
Andover a well uh connected and safe
community where people can navigate
around is really important. And then the
last of the goal areas uh the guiding
principles is about climate resiliency
and sustainability. Um so we want to
continue to make strategic investments
in our infrastructure to in anticipate
increased storm frequency and intensity.
Um this is just the reality on the
ground. We're getting bigger storms more
frequently and and it's stressing our
our bridges, our culverts, our roads, um
our flood plan.
We want to make sure that we demonstrate
climate resilience and planning for
municipal infrastructure and facilities.
So when we are replacing a culvert, we
want to make sure that we don't just
replace it in kind, but that we maybe
upsize it because the flooding is
getting bigger, the storm water events
are getting more significant. So we need
to plan for those future climate um
circumstances. And we want to make sure
that our local planning on things like
this, our infrastructure is aligned with
state and regional plans so that we can
make sure that we are doing things in
harmony with the state and we're not
we're not trying to fight them about
that. maintaining collaboration with all
these these levels of stakeholders. Um
continue to look at uh investments in in
public water and wastewater. Again,
Andover is a fairly rural place. We
don't have a public sewer line. We don't
have a public water line, but c certain
growth opportunities may necessitate
some of those things. And it doesn't
necessarily mean, you know, bringing in
sewers from well Atlantic or water from
the Atlantic or something like that.
there could be, you know, smaller
package systems, smaller community
systems that would enable the sort of
growth um that would be properly scaled
to vendor
and then prioritizing, you know,
municipal investments to protect uh
community facilities at risk. Um a
fantastic example of this happened a
couple of years ago. Um, Hurricane Ivan,
if you remember that, um, the the state
of Vermont's emergency operations
center, sort of their their beating
heart of what happens in a crisis, was
built in a flood plane and it washed
away. Um, which is a failure of
planning, I would say. Um and so if the
the community has critical facilities
that are in floodplane areas or in in
you know at risk um areas, we should
really rethink that and and make these
municipal investments in areas that are
likely to be more resilient um to the
changing climate.
And one of the final things that we did
in as part of the plan is to identify a
future land use map. Um and so this is
this is it. Um the Route 6 corridor is a
challenge. Um we call that the balanced
growth area. Uh particularly because
you know we're again you're all Andover
residents here. You know Route 6 is our
transportation uh lifeline.
It is also the most environmentally
sensitive area in in town. And so that
creates a challenge but also an
opportunity for some balanced growth
opportunities. looking at our
regulations to see how we can both
encourage development right along the
Route Six corridor, but then protect
sort of the northerly stretches of the
Route Six corridor where it intersects
with the Hot River area and its flood
plane and it's and the the the riparian
area that is so important um for
environmental integrity there. And then
the majority of the rest of town is is
uh intended to continue to be a
relatively rural um lowdensity
residential um encouraging of open
space, encouraging of forest
preservation and then and then you know
clustering development in in sort of key
areas.
And so the final part of the plan is the
implementation guide. So, as I said
previously, each of those areas um the
the guiding principle areas,
conservation, economic development,
housing, um you know, quality of life,
all of each of those things had those
goals and then is assigned a a number in
some cases a fairly large number of
actual action items. And in each
chapter, um we list those action items.
And in the implementation guide, which
is at the back of the plan, includes um
not only what the goal is, but also
who's responsible for it, how long it
should take, who are the people that
that are important to it, and
approximately how much it will cost. And
in this way, so we break down each of
the goals. So again, you know, to build
a civil civic engagement plan, that's
going to be the responsibility primarily
of the board of selectmen. They can't do
it alone. They're going to need the help
from their town administrator, town
staff, commissioners, and that sort of
thing. But it's something that they
should get started on pretty immediately
within the first couple years of the
plan, but it shouldn't cost that much
money. And so we've done this same sort
of analysis for all of the goals in the
plan. Um, and uh, in that way it's it's
easy to revisit and that the plan of the
the planning and zoning commission as
well as all of the the different boards
and commissions can see that they have
their to-do list mapped out for them in
this plan and can track this year over
year over year. When we get to year
three of this plan, we open it up and
say, "Hey, has the board of select been
really started on any kind of civic
engagement plan? They haven't. Well,
they better get to it, you And so this
is this keeps everyone in town sort of
accountable and answerable to the goals
of the plan. Um and that basically
concludes my presentation. Um I'm going
to stop sharing my screen so we can see
if there are any.
>> Before you do that slide, John.
>> Oh, too late. Okay, let's see.
>> Um yeah, sorry J what slide?
>> It was the future land use.
>> Yeah.
now and my question is we keep hearing
about you know the action item that's
coming our way to create a developable
land use map
and I was just wondering how hard it
would be to turn that thing that seemed
to be the it would seem like if we could
identify developable land and put it on
that you we'd be done with one of the
actions that I know is going to come.
>> Well, I
it's going to be Ricky and I Well, there
I have a couple responses to that. So,
so for those who aren't familiar, um the
the state of Connecticut passed a law in
November, um public act 251, which uh
requires municipalities to develop a
housing growth plan, um which is a
five-year plan that replaces the
affordable housing plan that
municipalities had to produce a couple
years ago. And a housing growth plan um
will be uh will have a number attached
to it um which is a goal. and and we
don't know what that number is yet
because the state hasn't really hasn't
developed those numbers. But at at some
point in the next year, Andover will get
assigned um a number in collaboration
with the state in the region um which
will be our target for new for new
housing um in town over 10 years.
Part of that analysis is going to be, as
Jed said, a developable land analysis.
Um that is guidance is going to be is
forthcoming from the state. Um, it's not
clear exactly how they're going to do
this, but I I I suspect they're going to
have a couple of hard categories of high
developability and a couple of hard
categories of low developability, which
would be the low developability would be
flood planes and wetlands and active,
you know, actual water bodies. Um, land
that are encumbered by, uh, you know,
ownership by the state. if it's state
forest or it's town town park. Um those
are sort of offlimit developments. Then
there's other things that are going to
be highly developable which is you know
land um you know immediately adjacent to
ster state roads that has access to
public sewer and public water that has
um existing development in the vicinity
that has perhaps a transit station. And
over doesn't have one of those but if
you've got you know if you're on Metro
North train station area surrounding
that will be highly developable. Um, and
then everything else is going to be sort
of gray areas, slightly more, slightly
less developable. I don't think
necessarily that the state is going to
come up with anything that isn't really
reflected here already. Um, you know, we
we considered large forest blocks. We
included we talked about areas of open
space. We talked about areas of of
highway infrastructure, of flood plane,
of wetlands.
I I don't think it's going to be that
much different from from the
considerations we've already had, but um
I would suggest when that
guidance comes out, which is probably
not going to come out until close to
December, um this commission could
consider
making an interim uh change, an interim
um adop revision to this plan of
conservation and development to adopt
those standards. I think more likely um
we'll we'll it'll just get wrapped up
into our housing growth plan um which
you know the housing growth plan is
intended to reflect the the goals and
and the analysis of Atlantic
conservation and development. So,
>> so I had really, you know, my first
thought was, well, we know, we know what
the developable things are, less the
terms of where we consider affordable
housing, you know, back here with the
transfer station, right? And then
quarters,
>> right?
>> Um, then I guess, you know, we've got
these big tracks of land, you know, like
up on Skinner and and that and I guess
those could be considered developable,
too.
develop a bowl, but but yeah, perhaps
not high priority.
>> Yeah,
>> because of because of their their you
know, their remoteness or lack of
proximity to to other resources, but
yeah.
>> Okay.
>> Good question, T. Thank you. Um, all
right. Now, I'm going to actually to
stop the share. Okay,
I'll turn it back to you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Josh. Um, now we're
going to have a section here where we
have questions by staff, commissioners,
and any comments by the public. And um,
I respectfully ask everybody goes like
one at a time.
And
anybody got any questions?
>> You're starting starting with
commission.
>> Starting with commission. Good idea. I
got a comment. One of the things that
you know surprised me I guess and maybe
it shouldn't is when we were talking
about Andover's budget we said that
education took up
81%
which okay but I said 19% to run the
town and I do remember that on the
survey you know clearly the very top
priority of everybody in the town
adequately maintain the roads and the
bridges
and uh in your comment on the 81% is
reflective of similar to other towns.
So, I guess everybody's running their
town
pretty tight, but uh you know, one of
the the things that
Bob Hamburger commented on and at, uh,
you know, the tri the, uh,
board of ed, finance, and board of
selectment meeting was, you know, we've
got 33 miles of road, and I think the
number came up to a million and a half
dollars per mile to uh, put down new
road and and how many years you have to
do it. But, you know, we need to be
banking a couple million dollars a year
to just be able to maintain the roads.
That's not counting the the covers in
that. And so I guess I just put that for
our awareness as we go into, you know,
we're into budget season now that
last year down budget took a good hit
and uh
we can't keep doing that and maintain
that excellent quality of life that we
were talking about you can drive around
and have a road that uh you don't fall
into the pothole and hoof up your car
on. bill that that surprised me that uh
I always thought we were trying to to
go, you know, almost balanced one third
for RAM, one third for the school here,
one third for the town, but I guess we
didn't do that as well as I thought we
were.
>> It's Yeah, that the the town has a lot
less control over school expenses than
than it does over municipal expenses.
>> Yeah.
Um, one one thing I didn't mention
during my presentation um is it's our
responsibility um as part of the public
hearing process for this plan to provide
a copy um to the board of selectmen for
their comment as well as to provide a
copy to the capital region council of
governments or regional government for
their comments. Um the selectman I I
believe Scott correct me if I'm wrong
had had no uh extensive comments on the
plan. Um we gave him an opportunity last
month to come to the meeting. uh and the
the capital region um forwarded a letter
on Monday I believe we including in the
record um they had no they had no
negative comments about the plan they
they basically endorsed it so so we've
satisfied our our statuto
responsibilities that way
>> great
>> yeah question
um you're saying about putting in the
sidewalks and stuff like that the public
access
Um, and then again, we're saying that
this town is there's a lot of seniors in
this town, which are great. Um, what's
going to happen to the taxes? We're
going to have to hire more people to the
town to um clean these sidewalks. We're
going to have to have more equipment to
clean these sidewalks. We're going to
have, you know, all this development.
How's this all going to get funded?
Because you got a senior pound, fixed
income. You can't be keep cranking up
these tax people because you're they're
going to leave. It's going to do the
opposite of what you want. Whereas if we
did something like
the made moose where we took some land
and we put canoes in and we made people
want to come here for activities and
that money went into town. It's bringing
people here to see our town and maybe
want here. You know, I just think that
spending a lot of money on
transportation without adding sidewalk.
This is more expense to the other.
Um
it is true that adding infrastructure
cost money.
>> Um it also adds to the quality of life.
Um which is also seen in rising property
values. If you have a pleasant town that
people want to move to and live in and
walk around, um your your property
values will increase as a result. Um,
but that's also why economic
development, as you say, is an
incredibly important component. We
can't, you know, not have any new
businesses or any growth happen and and
expect the same people to pay increased
property tax. As you said, that's that's
untenable. That that is unsustainable.
So, some certain amount of growth is
necessary and and that's where economic
development comes in. We need to bring
more businesses. you know, people people
said basically, you know, we're going to
we should use Route 6 for more shopping
opportunities, for more restaurants, for
you know, you know, small businesses and
things like that. That sort of economic
development will grow the grandest and
not create the same strains as you know,
senior housing and that sort of thing.
Correct.
>> So, it's it's a balance and so it's it's
not let's just do main booths and not
sidewalks for anybody. It's a it's a
question of both. It's a question. that
keeps your environmental area nice, too.
So, you have that, but yeah, agree. You
need to have your Dollar Generals, your
a few other things to come in here to
offset it.
>> I want to have the people in this town
who can't stay in our houses anymore be
able to stay in this town and have a
place to go to, too. I agree with that,
right? But I don't want to go get so
that can't afford to live.
>> I I think your your concerns and your
goals are exactly reflected in the plan.
But yeah, it's it's you. Yeah, we we can
neither we can neither expect, you know,
people to to um pay for more and more
enhancements without, you know, getting
without getting anything in return. and
and we want to create that that um I
don't know I guess pipeline is the wrong
word but to you know to create those
opportunities for people to live in town
and and you know if you're in
you know a widow or widowerower in a
4500 foot you know five bedroomedroom
house you're just rattling around you
don't want to go up and down the stairs
anymore but you love and or you want to
stay in town we want to create those
opportunities for people to stay and
then have a young family move into that
that be old house and keep the
generations going and so that you know
the the people who have been paying
taxes in these big old houses can retire
in town in a smaller you know in an
empty neester sort of situation pay less
taxes still appreciate the town and and
the town has continued to grow for a
young family.
>> Well the perfect example is Hurst Farm.
>> Think about small little farm right
trees. Now look at it. It's got a
beautiful store. Get homemade stuff made
there which is awesome. It's a great
place to go. that's taking an existing
property and making it into something
they might want to go there and see. My
wife used to go there when she was a
little kid. So, it's and it's got much,
you know, favor.
>> And so, part of that is to make sure
that our regulations are in place to
allow folks like the her farm to grow
their operation and not have the town
sort of get in the way of that. Um
and and yeah, so so we have that sort of
continuity and we allow the existing
businesses and exactly that type of
business that you know the Hurst family
farm is is exactly the kind of business
that reflects and you know it's it's a
it's a it's a money maker for the
family. It's a money maker for the
community in terms of its tax uh revenue
and its generation of of uh tourism. Um
and it's you know it doesn't it doesn't
detract from the community. So that that
you know our our economic development
efforts, our regulations have to reflect
that.
>> A lot of things like that would be
awesome.
>> Yeah. I quarterly invite you to economic
development commission meetings. We're
always looking for volunteers and uh
we've been talking a lot about what you
just asked. So
>> you guys approved a place for my parents
to move in and I'll defin that
question.
>> Go ahead Jay. Yeah, just I just wanted
to respond to um to that conversation.
Um first of all, you know, thank you for
that presentation. I think it's uh
really wonderful to see um development
in Andover being contemplated in a very
thoughtful way. Um I think keeping
keeping Andover um
Andover um while still developing is
very important. Um but just getting to
getting to the idea of the sidewalks um
or general being ability to navigate the
town outside of driving um you know
folks on uh the Andover Lakeside in
particular you know that's my experience
living here for the past 20 years uh
it's a very dangerous area um to walk um
because there are no sidewalks there are
no real um ways of navigating
um around and uh we do walk it. Um and
you can see some of the uh you talk
about some of the the older folks in
town um you know they they're wearing
you know bright orange
um uh jackets and flashlights um
anything they can to try and not get hit
um while still getting exercise. Um and
my wife and I have to do the same thing.
So, I think and uh if anybody's done
some research on the town and the
livability of the town for people that
might be thinking about coming here, um
we do really well in just about every
case. Our school, um the environment,
all of that. Um where we don't do well
is walkability. Um very very poor. Uh so
I think that um you know, I don't have
any numbers or anything. This is just
gut. But I would I would suggest that if
we do it if we we do think about um
improving
on foot or on bike navigility
of the town um in a way that um we can
sustain um we'll end up bringing more
people into the town um incl es
especially small families that are going
to be here for a long time and invest.
So, uh, that's my two cents, but thank
you very much for that presentation.
That was great.
>> Thank you, Jay.
>> Um, really John, more questions on the
process than anything. So, the
conservation commission number of months
back, we had did a sort of a final edit
review and submitted, I think, some
edits to the maps for clarification,
some edits to the text. Um, so I I'm
curious as to sort of where the plan is.
Is there a version posted now? Is it is
it a is it available? Is, you know,
what's time table sort of for wrapping
up the ball on it? So yeah, and I think
um the a number I think of just about
all of the changes that were proposed by
yourself and Maryanne a couple of months
ago have been incorporated
um into the version that would that will
ideally be adopted. The exception is um
I believe last week or so our weapons
officer
>> um provided a little bit of commentary
on some of the goals and I' I'd forward
it to you to to review those. So there
are a couple of technical changes that
are yet to be incorporated. Yep.
>> And so it's really up to this commission
on whether or not they want to you guys
want to review those sort of last minute
technical changes um or you know
possibly adopt the plan pending the
incorporation of sort of this last
little bit. Um but yeah, so it's
>> yeah,
>> you know, it's it's sort of up to the
commission how they want to handle that.
>> Okay. to to that point. I met with Joe
Wangner, the weapon agent, um last week,
went through that and corresponded with
you on that. So that we went sort of
item by item who his uh comments were
which were related to the in the
wetlands regulations and recommendations
we had made to look at potential uh um
uh updates to those which would be part
of a separate regulatory review process
that would wrote that implementation
plan. Um so I leave it up to the
commission how they would handle it. We
do have we did and I think I sent you
some of the language although if you
want to sit down a little bit more
details we could do that but there were
some elements uh you talked about the
implementation chapter tonight you
showed that that's been filled out with
responsibilities timets budgets things
like that that wasn't in the earlier
review that we looked at right
>> and I know that we had put together a
number of recommendations associated
with policy with um letting zoning rags
wetlands rags roles of um conservation
commission and land own land uh land
owner and public outlets and so on and
so forth. So you know is that uh
available for review to look at the the
schedules of those and and what you're
looking
>> that's been that that the implementation
table has been on the town website for
for two months already.
>> Okay. Okay.
>> It's posted this this draft is posted in
the planning and zoning section.
>> Okay. under uh new pend under pending uh
applications.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> So that so could Mr. You have another
time.
>> Just want to tag on to what talked about
the commission or anything but if we
want to comment on this what is the
deadline
I just I don't think this is well well
publicized. I don't remember seeing
stuff in the river east said this is
available for public comment and visa
provided by XYZ date. So I heard about
this meeting tonight and I it's a good
it's a good lengthy documents. I started
for you to get but I certainly couldn't
get through with it. So what is the
timeline for public comments to be
provided on this jerk doc?
>> It's it's really up to the commission.
This is the public hearing.
>> No, but I'm just talking about I don't
think it was well publicized. If I if I
if I missed something or missed a vote
or something, I don't remember seeing
anything on the town Facebook page or
the River East or anything about this.
So, um, hearing about this, I I'm I
guess I feel timely pressed to provide
this, but I was asking what is the
deadline?
>> Yeah, that's that's a I I refer that
question back to the to to the
commission. It's really it's it's
entirely their discretion on on whether
to you know recognizing that some people
feel like they weren't uh aware of the
process sufficiently. The commission is
certainly um uh in within its own power
to continue the hearing um or you know
basically give give the public another
month to submit written comments or
whatever. This is this is the public
hearing you know. Uh so it's really and
you know and I I I'm not at all trying
to sort of like a blame a victim things
because a lot of times these things just
you know sort of fly below the radar.
You know the these these meetings have
been happening for two years now. The
process has been has been occurring. You
know we've done outreach through the
various commissions and and boards and
so sought their input.
Part of part of being part of a
municipality and part of democracy is is
showing up and making yourself aware.
You know, we there's a limit to how much
sort of individual doornocking or
handholding the the commission can do.
That said, you know, if people aren't
aware, that's that's not ideal. That's
not ideal.
>> If I miss somebody, my bad,
>> right? So, and you know,
>> right, it's really it's really up to the
commission to figure out how how they
want to close the loop on that.
If I may, that's why in in the action
items right in the beginning, one of the
one of the items is that how how are we
going to engage our population more you
know the education of how the government
does and you know be more involved and
you know we from what I've noticed in
almost 20 years here in for people that
want to know they start showing up to
the things to find out and you know I'm
sorry that you can get more notice u if
there's any major concerns you know
now's the time to voice your opinion and
we'll take it into consideration. Um I
mean we're not ask we're also not asking
to put a sidewalk on every street man
over here. This is I mean
>> that's not answer.
>> Yeah. I know right. You know it's like
John said it's a balance between the the
conservation and and a little bit of
development the way we we would all like
to see. We he's done a bunch of surveys
and a lot of the commission members I
speak for myself actually we talk to
other friends and family in town and we
get the idea of you know well what what
does everybody want to see our town do
with the next 10 years and that's
basically in my opinion that's the plan
of conservation and development how how
are we going to expend our resources not
just money but we have a big volunteer
element you know this entire commission
is you know elected but still volunteer
same with the conservation
wetlands. I can keep going.
So to answer your question, come on down
anytime. All meetings.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. Thank little comment. Go ahead.
There's again there's a lot of not I
don't want to go backwards in time,
right? But there's a lot of other people
and there's a lot of that don't know how
to access internet stuff like that. You
know, maybe people thought that a little
French
that said there's going to be no public
media on such and such day. They might
maybe they want to go, but they weren't
sure. You know, this wasn't enough.
Internet is a way everybody works going
on the town hall page. You can see what
are displayed there. I get that. But I'm
just thinking about people that are in
their 80s and their 70s. you name on
paper have access to that as well. But
we also still the town clerk town clerk
post all the meetings on on the board so
that and we have a community center now
so that you can see come on over and
take a look and
>> and and all public hearings are are
advertised in the breeze.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. I didn't know that also to answer
your question when I was on planning and
zoning for the record over 10 years ago
and this was our big concern too is what
a lot of people when they get to a
certain age and they don't want to have
the big house anymore where their
family's moved away or started their own
families. They don't want to it's
expensive to live in a big house man's
over
>> and pay the taxes never mind. Right. So
that was on our SK that was on our plan
of conservation 10 years ago too was to
find a spot to put a community uh you
know senior housing
>> over 55 and we're still working on it.
So it's a work in progress. This is
basically you know what we
>> absolutely
>> this is the our best shot at you know
this is our this is our goals
>> and whether we achieve them all or not
is up to how much support we get
basically.
Yep.
Um, it's always the same, but 50 or 100
people in this town that are involved,
>> right?
>> You know, I see you guys in town all the
time. Everybody in this room,
but then when you're walking around, you
see the people that come to the meetings
are always the same ones.
They're the ones that are involved in
the town.
It's good we have volunteers. Go ahead,
Lean.
>> Very good.
>> I didn't I thought you were done. I
thought
>> Go ahead, Lean.
>> Sorry. I thought Scott was through.
Scott, are you through?
>> Yes.
>> Um Okay, there's I hope you can hear me
okay because um I'm getting even more
vibration than usual listening. So, um
I'm going to be a little bit vague, but
it seems to me when the conservation
commission came to us, um I want to say
it was sometime in the middle of last
year,
they had a couple of recommendations
that I had questions about and I haven't
been able to find them. Um I found them
at one point in prior to this meeting,
but I'm not finding them again. And I'm
not when I look where somebody just said
the POCD is
on the town website under planning and
zoning commission, my computer's just
not bringing it up. I'm getting some
kind of an error message. And I've also
looked in my emails from John for the
draft. But basically, one one or two of
their suggestions had something to do
with wetlands related to lot sizes and
coverage and percent of wetlands. And I
had a question at the time and it's my
recollection is that and again I'm being
vague because I can't put my finger on
it now but that Jed agreed with me at
the time and part of my point is I
thought we were going to revisit that
and I was kind of looking out for it and
I don't know that we ever did.
>> Other words I think they just got
incorporated
um pretty much into the POC.
So yeah, um hopefully it's something
that I can find very soon. It'll be
outside of the public hearing.
>> Um but I don't know Jed if you have any
recollection of this.
>> Yeah, I I believe I'm sorry J if I
might. I believe Leanne you're uh if you
have a copy of the PDF,
it's page 58. It's it has to do with the
regulatory action recommendations from
the conservation commission concerning
um
replacing and and I'm going to look at
Hank for this uh replacing
75% with 100% of wetlands acreage
removed when calculating building
allowances for sites.
>> Correct.
>> That sounds like it.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So that's that's it's in
it's a recommendation um in the
conservation chapter which is six
specifically page 58.
Um and I don't know Hank if you there's
any other elaboration you want to make.
>> Yeah. No, that that's absolutely
correct. And Leanne, um the you know,
from the conservation commission
standpoint, when we're presenting when
we review the town's policies,
regulations, sort of outreach and
educational initiatives with the uh um
within town as well as management around
town properties. One of the things that
we focused on is that these were
recommendations that we anticipated
um interfacing as a commission with the
inland wetland commission with planning
and zoning during the implementation
phase of the of the plan of conservation
development. So in other words, adoption
of the plan of conservation development
as I understand it doesn't adopt those
regulations. I have a separate process
to review and adopt regulations and
that's where those discussions could
occur and you know further research or
whatever that was needed to sort of
refine that or adopt that would occur.
So these were just our take of the areas
that we felt that needed to be looked at
and our recommendations of how we
thought they should be. But that there
would be a process going forward
hopefully earlier than later um in the
implementation to tackle those those
recommendations. Yeah. And and this is a
an enormous oversight of mine in my
presentation. I call this a advisory
document which is important to
reinforce. If adopted, this plan is not
law. It does not change
anything other than becoming the new um
advisory document for all you know
future investments of the town, future
regulatory changes of the town, all this
stuff. This this basically this should
be our goal. But the key part there is
should be it is then falls to each
individual board and commission to then
go through their process on changing
regulations on making investments on all
that stuff has to go through the board
of finance go through planning and
zoning go through the board of selecting
and go through town meeting depending on
the individual process for how that
recommendation gets carried out. So if
this gets adopted, you know, it does not
it does not fundamentally change the way
we we go about our daily daily lives or
how we do zoning. It just lays the
groundwork for those future changes.
>> I think one of the things I remember
Hank being very passionate about when we
were
>> You remember that meeting?
>> I do. And uh you know
and we probably can't show it up here,
but there's there's a map in here that
shows our business corridor all along
route six. And then there's Hank's map
with the open the Hop River corridor
right on top of all that business
development thing. And so one of the
things that we were working on is do we
have the town zone proper? you know, are
the right ones, industrial business,
that sort of thing. And there's going to
be times where from a conservation
standpoint, we don't want to develop
that thing. So, we need to to break that
right right this minute. We got the
broad brush. Here's the hot river
corridor we want to protect. Here's the
business we want to develop. And they
are the exact same thing. And so, we
we've got to get back to that. And it
was a lot harder than I thought it was
when you were working on that. And
that's why, you know, it took us six
months to uh
>> to figure out it was going to be hard.
>> So I I think that's what I don't know if
that's what Vian was talking about or
not, but I know that's one of the things
that uh you and Maryanne wanted to make
sure that we continued working on as
soon as we got done with this thing.
>> Okay. So, are you all saying that this
is that the POCD isn't law? In other
words, that this could still be um
applied even though it says, you know,
this is
like if somebody's reading it and they
didn't follow this process at all and
they said it says this is what you're
supposed to do, are you saying that
there's still room for like the the IWWC
and us to
um modify that?
>> Yes. Most of the actions start out with
the words consider.
>> Yes. It's yes it's and it's deliberately
written. Yeah. Um that said if um Yes.
So this you are absolutely correct. This
is not law. There's still lots and lots
and lots and lots of room for
negotiation and reconsideration and and
uh even even you know opposing votes. Um
the the one wrinkle there is so let's
say you know uh next year at this time
the plan is adopted inland wetlands
comes or or conservation commission
comes before planning and zoning with
some proposed zoning changes uh that
might change you know calculation of of
developable area based on wetlands or
what have you. um they propose to make a
zoning change and um they the the weight
of the argument will be on their side
because that argument will be presented
in the plan of conservation and
development as a strong recommendation
um to let's say change the impervious
coverage as an example. Um when when uh
the zoning commission reviews a proposal
such as that, they are obliged to look
at the plan of conservation and
development and say is this supported by
the planet conservation development or
is this in opposition to the goals of
the planet conservation development. In
theory, if they are trying to adopt a
regulation that is in opposition to the
plan of conservation and development,
they should have a basically a
supermajority, essentially a veto
override of the goals of the plan. Um,
but that is possible if you know if you
get a supermajority of the commission of
planning and zoning that says, "Yeah, we
don't really care for these
recommendations by by conservation or by
wetlands or by whomever."
and and they get a supermajority vote.
That's the end of that recommendation.
So yeah, it is it is absolutely not law.
It does not change any policies yet, but
it just recommends that those policies
get changed in a certain direction.
>> Okay, I think that makes sense. Thank
you.
>> I like when it makes sense.
Hi, this is this is Elaine Bookart, the
chairman of the Economic Development
Commission, um, chiming in. Um, I you're
going to be hearing this a lot from me
over the next couple of months during
the whole budget process because the
most important thing for us and uh to
move forward with a plan of conservation
development is to have a planner.
And
I we haven't had a planner in town. We
don't have we don't have a town planner
until we just recently hired John to go
ahead and do the POC.
And hopefully we will continue to budget
money to have a planner
um to work with us on the POC
um for doing um any of the things that
are that are recommended um any kind of
economic developmental stuff, any kind
conservation efforts, anything we need
to have a planner because I think John
pointed how how um how horribly things
can go if it's not planned properly. You
know, if you don't have a planner and
you're not having the right oversight,
you're going to put something in the
wrong spot.
Um that was a good example that John had
made of a mistake with poor planning. So
I I am going to be advocating that we
definitely have in the budget to have a
planner continue on once the POCD is
done then to hopefully still have John
as our planner. Um so I'll be advocating
for that uh so we can continue on with
this. But yeah, this is just this is uh
this is how we would like to proceed for
the next 10 years. Um, and we're going
to have to work out all the details and
the plans and the money and what people
really want over the next 10 years that
goes ahead and gets us toward our goals
of what we have written in the POC.
That's it. Thanks.
>> So, Elaine, that under economic
development, that is action item number
one.
>> Yeah. make sure we have a planner
because it's so frustrating. We're just
a volunteer committee. No matter what
ideas we have, we don't have the
expertise to you move forward with any
of it. You know, we need we need a
planner who knows what's going on. And
also planners uh planners know how to
find the grants and the money that's out
there to go ahead and help us with our
goals. Um the money's out there, uh but
you have to have people who know how to
go out and find it. Um, so yep, that's
our number one goal. Thanks.
>> Thank you, Elaine.
>> Well, if I could just
>> Yeah, I uh I didn't know it till I
attended the training session the other
night on the new state bricks, but you
know, John is certainly tied in well
with the uh Capital Region Council of
Government and doing a lot of stuff
there. So he he knows what's going on
there and he can he can represent and
overwhel
in all those things in addition to doing
it down. So I think we got the right guy
to help us out. We just need to hold on
to him.
>> Yes
discussion.
Oh, and also uh going back a couple
minutes uh the the question was how do
some of the seniors find out the you
know information uh I know that John
actually sent out surveys of paper too
and they were distributed to seniors at
senior lunch so that we could get more
data because we recognize that some
people don't use the computer and you
know well did we do a good enough job I
don't know but that's one of the things
that we're also addressing in this
I'm trying to be more communicative than
more educational to the public.
>> We need to encourage Diane Granny to get
back on the uh this and that. Yeah,
there you go.
All right. There any other uh questions,
comments about the plan of conservation
development uh online
or here?
All
>> set. Thanks.
I mean, at this point, Mr. Chair, you're
looking for a vote to either a motion to
either continue or or close the hearing.
If you were looking to close the
hearing, I I would think that you may
want to make a note that the the
proposed, you know, uh technical
adjustments to the implementation guide
as as proposed by conservation and the
wetlands officer could be incorporated
into the final document. I I you know I
Hank I don't know if you think that
they're going to be if they're
relatively
targeted or or they're they're sort of
fundamental to changing the the spirit
of the plan.
>> No, they're not really a big shift.
They're just a little bit more to
clarify um from what's existing in there
and a couple of the regulations. They
don't really shift any of the
regulations. There was there was some
clarification issues with some of what
was designated as a cold water stream
because we had conflicting diagn
um so how
>> I I you know and what I and I think I
haven't seen sort of the final final
recommendation play out but I I would
put them in the category of of technical
adjustments basically.
So that's, you know, do do with that
what you want may chair.
>> Thank you.
>> And I've got probably half a dozen
little things to uh pass on to John that
probably aren't worth talking about here
tonight, but uh they're sort of
technical on uh just making a little bit
more accurate.
>> Okay.
Um,
so at this point
motion to close the public hearing.
>> Okay. No second with uh
before we make the vote, I'd like to
just make that note of the technical
adjustments that were going to be the
pending technical adjustments to be
adopted from the conservation commission
and the small edits you were mentioning,
J before we vote.
And we're ready to vote. Oh, sorry.
I can just close the public hearing
because it's not
>> close it. You can Yeah. Ask anybody
thinking open.
>> That's a good idea. Anybody have a
reason to keep the public hearing open
for the plan of conservation and
development?
Okay, I'm going to close the public
hearing for plan conservation and
development. Thank you everybody for
your hard work. It was a long
long time coming and a lot of work
involved from all the commissions. Thank
you to everybody that that helped with
that, especially John.
So, now we're going to move on to the We
show the reverse
picture here.
>> Is there is there a hard copy in front?
>> Okay, there there it is. Full paragraph
by you guys. Yep.
>> All the great things you're doing out
here. So the public hearing is closed.
I'd like to take a five minute recess so
everybody can take a bathroom break.
>> You need to vote on
>> uh to I just closed the hearing. So the
hearing's closed. I haven't seated.
>> Um
>> well that would be for the regular
meeting.
>> Regular. We have not started the regular
meeting. So five minute recess please
and then
come back start the regular meeting.
We got more bathroom.
17.
Peter town.
>> I I just got his comments from a week
ago.
And so I basically like a day or two.
We'll just incorporate.
>> Okay. Thanks.
Thank you.
We're going to start with that.
I went
>> way better than what 10 years ago
that still like listed his draft.
The one on the website
>> was more
with
Joe,
>> was that was this like his party?
>> He didn't tell
>> you
a year ago.
they left to
Chicago.
So that's like
far.
So yeah, come on now. that even
the conservation commission they do an
excellent job.
>> I'd love to see
But we got a couple
out in the middle of nowhere Right.
>> We talked about traffic.
traffic
that is
outweigh
but like in certain spots we have the
share of
So you came from
people are aware that your bicycle
ass,
>> you eyes as you get older.
There's been people
walking
and I just
always assume they're not going to see
me.
>> Thank you. Take care. Have a good night.
So you are right back.
All right.
Here we go.
Buckle up.
>> Okay. I'm calling to order the regular
scheduled meeting of planning and zoning
Andover, Connecticut, March 17, 2026.
John, is it still recording or are we
gonna Yeah, you're still recording.
>> Oh, okay. Yeah. Great.
All right. Now, we're going uh we have
sad news. We had a resignation from the
planning and zoning commission and uh a
is no longer going to be on the
commission. And
so before I do the roll call, I just
wanted to make that announcement. And um
we're going to be seating an alternate
tonight. Two alternates. One alternate.
Yep.
Um,
we have Kevin and Jay.
He's gonna flip a coin. Let's see.
Spoon volunteer to be seated for
alternates.
>> Makes no difference to me. You can see
Jay.
>> Okay. Thank you, Kevin. Jay,
>> happy
seat. Jay Cayman's for increment
and present is Scott Persan, Jed Larson,
and Hutchinson and myself.
And uh we have next order of business.
We have a change to the agenda, right,
Wayne? Or is that already been removed?
No, it's still on the agenda.
Okay. Should we do that now?
We're going to remove
uh there was an application
>> need to motion and
>> the application of um
oh what road was it? Uh
>> item 16.
>> Yeah. 34 Old Farms Road. That
application has been withdrawn.
Application 26-6
SP
with
>> Thank you very much.
Um, we need to make a motion for that or
to
>> take it off the agenda, you know. Okay.
It's sort of academic, isn't it?
>> Let's do it.
>> Can I get a motion to remove that from
the agenda?
>> Make a motion to remove item 6A
from the agenda.
>> Thank you.
>> Second.
>> Oh, thank you, Jay. Secondly by Jay.
>> Uh, all in favor?
I
>> I
>> Okay. Move 5 Z.
>> Okay.
Any other additions or changes to the
agenda that anybody wants to bring?
>> Moving on to public speak. Uh any public
speak that's concerns, topics not on
this agenda?
Moving on. Uh, old business.
>> Okay.
Up first is 5A, the special permit
or the accessory department at the far
hurst farm store.
Uh, discussion.
>> Any concerns?
Make a motion to approve the
application. I'll second that. Thank
you, Ted. All in favor?
>> I
>> J. And Leanne.
>> All right. And your special permit
application is approved. Um I just like
to make a note.
>> Go ahead, Wayne.
>> It's effective when it's filed with on
the um on the land records.
>> Yeah, this is very important. It's come
to our attention in the past. the
applicants don't always file the
the the last part of their application.
>> You'll get a notice u the notice of
action and that needs to be filed that
you need to file that and the land
records.
>> I believe Thomas is familiar with that.
>> Yeah, it's the same as your two other
>> special permits that you got.
>> Thank you. Anybody trying to do
something?
>> Yeah. And I just want to get in the
habit of making sure we make that
announcement after the approval of any
application because it's come to our
attention that he passed the follow
through was not done and then five years
later somebody oh I was approved and we
have to look it up in the minutes and
it's never been filed on the land
record. So thank you much and I hope you
enjoyed the plan of conservation
information.
Yeah.
>> You're welcome to stay. You don't have
to do it.
>> My sister's labor.
>> All right. Congratulations.
>> Congratulations.
Thank you very much.
Moving on to
5B.
>> Yes, this is for for me. U
if you guys remember uh you approved the
accessory department for St. going 280
Route 6
>> uh in December
and um so come to me with a revised
floor plan.
>> We jumped ahead a little bit later.
>> Oh, I did.
>> Yeah, it's okay. BD. Yeah. Um
>> your old sh Oh, I'm sorry.
>> That's okay.
>> I'm sorry.
>> I just want to get that out of the way.
Then we can definitely move on.
strike here for the record.
>> Better not be quiet.
>> Okay. Um, I think that right before we
started the regular meeting, we were
ready to
have our final discussion and and or
uh make a motion to adopt the POC with
the
pending technical adjustments uh and
small edits from Jenner. Now, would you
like to still make the motion or do we
need more discussion?
Uh
so let's say that uh
if we don't need any more discussion
what would what's the the next step
after we vote that it's done
what so the the if if you are limiting
the edits to the the minor editorial
things that you are offering and the
things that that Hank is filtering from
the outgoing wetlands officer. Those
would be the only editorial changes we
would make to the plan. We would uh so
we would we'd finalize that, clean it up
until it's it's final it final PDF.
We'll print copies, put it on the
website, distribute. But um that would
be the change. And the other the I would
note like in the in the text of the plan
as I was going through there is in the
middle of it there is a a note in red
that says insert photo of town garage or
something like that that that you know
so there's there's a couple of little
formatting things that need to get
cleaned up but nothing that affects the
the substance of the plan.
>> Um so we would yeah we would basically
produce a final PDF. we would take so we
put adopted by planning and zoning
commission on the state that sort of
thing on a on the final PDF
>> and you know probably the most
>> significant comment that's uh technical
in nature only is the uh you know the
the graph of Andover elementary school
enrollment shows the dip in 2021 can you
show me what page it's on page two okay
on page one, you know, in the bottom
sentence there, while school enrollment
declined until 2018
to a low of 191.
>> And so that's
different than what your graph shows
>> and then later on you do have the right
year for the dip in a in a different
discussion.
>> So that's it's we just need to change
2018 or to 2021. I guess you the other
kind of comment I think we we talk about
school street I think it's school road
but this is so these that's the nature
>> these are typographical yeah
>> I'll just send them over to you to just
make it a little cleaner
>> y
>> yeah
it doesn't change the substance of the
plan it's right
>> so I
could approve the plan and authorize
John to make the technical and
typographical
>> edits
that we're discussing.
>> We could approve it. Yeah. Do Wayne
thing.
>> Yeah. So, it's it's approved with the
very limited typographical changes that
that are that are submitting. Yeah.
>> Okay. I'll make a motion to approve the
plan of conservation development.
>> I'll second that.
>> All right. I'll take an official vote.
Go ahead. One of the things
after we make a motion, we should always
have a little opportunity for discussion
on the motion.
>> Thank you.
>> There has to be a lot you give if you
give that opportunity.
>> Any discussion on the motion
before we take a vote?
Okay. Okay.
>> And and that we've noted the technical
adjustments just the
typographical edits.
I will now take a vote. Um I for myself
Scott I Jed by I
>> Leanne
>> I
>> and J
>> motion passes 500.
We have a new plan of conservation.
Congratulations. Thank you again
everybody. That was a lot of work that
was put into this. So thank you. Thank
you.
And now
>> Yeah. Thank you.
Now we can go out to new business.
Item 6A was removed previously. Item 6B,
a market rate accessory apartment.
>> Unless you'd like to swap C and B,
Wayne.
>> No, it's fine.
>> Okay,
>> I'll give to you. All right, Wayne.
>> Well, it's a it's another market race.
Trust me, it's hard one. I believe I
gave you guys the the application
32 right now. It's just
set a hearing date.
I know. Anyway, that's
what that is. The applicant Colorado
Land Gloss.
>> Yes.
I pronounced that right?
>> Language.
>> Lang voice. All right. Um anyway, at at
this point,
this is uh just to set the public
hearing date for the success rate. All
right. He's here. We got I mean, you
can't deliberate it now. This isn't this
isn't a time to ask questions about the
project or anything like that. That is
for after for during the public for
after the public hearing. I just want to
make that understood. I
But if Ron wants to say something, I
think he can
go ahead.
>> I can I can say a little about it just
so you have a little idea. So, I have 24
acres of land up where I live. Um, we
have a horse farm right there. Now, um,
between the barn and my back garage
that's attached to my house, two car
attached to the house. We're looking to
put a a new unit in for my 90 year old
parents that are having dad has
dementia. We're trying to get them so
they're expensive and we can u help them
out more. So, so it's going to be a
standalone unit. It's going to be 20 ft
from the back garage, uh, but it's going
to be about, uh, I think it's like 60 ft
from the barn. Uh, not near the property
line at all. And, um, what we're going
through right now is I'm waiting for
Glenn from the, um,
well, east east dish to uh, get back to
me. He talked to me and we're waiting on
them right now. Um I had a new tank put
in in 2020, septic tank. Uh my leech
fields are very good. He's officer, but
we're waiting for some um looking for
some dimensions on how deep the pipes
are and stuff like that from the drain
experts that put in the tank. So Glenn
is on vacation this week, so I have
nothing to do on that.
>> So be careful at this point. This we're
not the commission really shouldn't be.
It's not deliberating, debating or
anything like that. It's only setting
the date for your public hearing when
you have to have all that stuff
>> ready for the commission.
>> Yes. I I sent an email this morning that
list of
>> So that's what we're looking to do is
put up an ad.
>> My my only comment would be is if uh you
know trust Wayne if if you think you
need more time then we can schedule the
public hearing a little later if you're
having a hold up with anything like the
>> I'm not having a hold up.
>> No no he's having a hold up with with
health department etc. What are we
looking at right now, Wayne, for the
>> Well, the the commission could
theoretically schedule the public
hearing for next month's meeting, the 20
21st,
>> or it could push it off till May 17 or
something like that. Um, what you don't
want is you don't want to have an
incomplete application because they you
it can't be approved,
>> right?
>> Um,
>> okay. And I don't know what the
situation is with Eastern Highlands
Health District. That's that's between
you and them.
>> Okay. I may have to put it off, but um
is is there a timeline of when I can put
it off? Like if I if we set the date
tonight for next month,
>> the hearing has to happen within 65 days
of
um receiving the application.
>> Okay. Right. And then we could leave the
public hearing open, but that's up to
>> you. You could have the public hearing
next month,
>> right?
>> Then leave it open pending. You know,
that's
it. Sort of goes to you how you want to,
I guess, roll the dice. Um, with Eastern
Highlands Health District,
>> let's schedule it for next month. And,
um,
>> you could always ask for an extension. I
can ask for an extension that way.
>> Sounds good.
>> Motion.
>> I motion.
>> I'm asking for a motion
>> to set a public hearing date for the
special permit application 26-4 SP.
>> I'll make a motion. We set the public
hearing date for April 21st.
Thank you.
>> Thank you. All in favor?
>> I I
>> I
>> motion passes 500 Z and we have to I
think Wayne is already familiar with
this process. He puts in a public the
you put in a notice, right? Right.
>> There'll be two legal notices um
assigned posted on the on the street.
Sounds good.
>> You'll get all that information and time
to do it.
Is the meeting usually at 7 o'clock?
Usually at 7.
>> Yes.
>> Yes. We try to have the public hearing
first.
>> All right. Thank you. You're welcome.
>> Moving on to new business item C.
>> Okay.
>> Go ahead, Wayne. You're on.
>> All right. So the commission approved So
county's uh application for this
accessory apartment 2806. This is new
construction and new accessory fun. Um
we have brought in a revised floor plan
uh that includes a garage where the
accessory apartment originally was
intended.
Uh so my question to the commission is
whether or not this is
a minor change that
um I can just approve
or
circle back for a uh new public area.
And um
is he still doing the accessory
apartment?
>> He's still doing the accessory
apartment. Basically, he did the the uh
footprint of the of the residence is
staying the same. It's not changing.
He's uh moving the the accessory
apartment
upstairs
directly above
uh where the ground,
>> right? The garage is going where the
accessory apartment originally was going
to be and over the garage is going to be
the accessory apartment. Same size, same
dimensions.
Uh,
don't see my changes. I mean, I have the
before and after drawings here.
So, this is this is what you guys
approved and this is what he's brought
me.
So, um,
this is Yeah,
this first go. I'm sorry. The garage is
going where the kitchen got
this was the accessory apartment.
And this was
I'm sorry
this is the access sorry this is the
accessory apartment right here. No,
actually now it's a garage
and I moved it to the this attic space
is now the accessory apartment
change.
>> That's certainly a smaller space than
this.
>> Yeah.
So you did he change the roof line or
anything? Amen.
>> Oh,
here this is the revised elevation.
Yes. So we squandered from dog house
dormers to
a big.
Okay.
>> Annie's added added us added the stairs.
Yeah.
>> Exterior stairs.
I'm thinking that
my thinking it's it's
>> you move anything
>> the the overall footprint of the house
is staying the house is staying the
same. So
I'm thinking this just a minor change
and I have to defer to the commission.
At least that's my understanding.
>> So if if we're not okay with it, then
you'd have to
>> there's got to come back for a new
public hearing.
>> Yep.
>> Do I have it? Do I have that correct?
>> Yeah. And because the commission has
delegated themselves the ability to
determine whether something is is minor
and therefore can just be handled
administratively or if you don't believe
it's minor then it's a new
>> Mr. Commission's decision whether it's
or not.
>> Right. You've given yourself that
discretion on your rights.
>> So how does he get up into this
accessory department?
>> It's got a set of exterior stairs.
>> Excellent.
Um,
commission discussion.
Does anybody uh see a substantive change
in that plan that you would require come
back for a new public hearing? Leanne
and Jay, please. What do you think?
>> Just a quick question. Um, so the stairs
are the one way of entrance and exit. Is
that sufficient for um emergency?
That's a Yes.
>> Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
>> Yeah. On on on
this type of dwelling. Yes.
>> Is there an interior connecting door
also?
>> No.
>> Okay.
>> So, the other egress would basically be
the windows
>> and that was that was the way it was
before.
>> The way it was before was just an
exterior door.
>> That's an exterior door. Okay.
>> That's a good question.
Go ahead, Leanne.
>> I just think that's a good question. Um,
it sounds like you all are satisfied
that there's not a real um substantive
difference. So,
just because I can't see, you know, the
table map from here, but it it doesn't
sound very complicated.
plans online.
The plans on the website are the plan.
Okay.
>> Well, um I think I'm going to just read
the room and ask for a motion to accept
the minor changes
or conversely if anybody has a motion to
ask for another public hearing.
I'll make a motion to consider the
change proposed to minor in nature.
>> Second that.
>> All right, let's take a vote. All in
favor?
>> I
>> I motion passes 500.
>> Okay, it's all back in your hands,
Wayne.
>> All right. A little.
All right, moving on to correspondence.
I'll do two parts. Do you have any
correspondence, John?
>> Um, I do not have any.
>> I just want to give you the opportunity.
Go ahead, Wayne.
>> I don't really have any correspondence.
Do you have a copy of the KURGS uh
review of the PCD?
>> Yes.
Um,
I did get some actually the wetlands
agent got correspondence
uh from
who was it? Oh, from the state. Um,
they're they they're updating their plan
and whatnot for
Nathan Hill State Forest. I've actually
got a throw a couple copies of that out
there for you guys if you're interested.
>> I started reviewing that today.
And I I forwarded that on to
conservation commission and wetlands.
>> She sent it to the selectman also soon.
>> Okay. Yeah. No. Okay. And uh
that's it for substantive correspondence
>> and the letter that was uh in the
department of that was part of it.
>> One of the exhibits. Yeah.
>> The occupation.
>> Okay.
>> All right. Thank you.
>> Gave us a glowing.
>> Yeah, that was just
>> the referral.
>> Yeah, that was nice.
>> Very nice.
>> Very good. And a great writer.
>> Did you write that for him, John?
>> I did not. I did not. That was that's
Jacob and all of his he signs off his
all all his emails with all the positive
vibes. That's that's his Yeah.
sincerity.
>> Very nice.
Ah, okay. Moving on to commission
discussion. I I guess that I
did the increment resignation out of
sequence, so my apologies.
Um,
but uh let's let's move on to item A.
liaison to Cra. Yeah, it was brought to
my attention that we do not currently
have liaison to the regional planning
commission.
>> Who's our last one?
>> Eric.
>> Well, I was
>> I mean Eric is the leazison to the
policy board.
>> Yeah.
>> But this is the regional planning
commission which is a separate entity.
It's they basically have six meetings a
year every other month. I think it's
third Thursday usually via Zoom um and
they discuss you know issues of regional
importance but then also um review
referrals. So like when when you do a a
zone change that might affect the town
boundary area. Um you know we sometimes
get referrals from from Coventry or from
from Balden or whatever. Um it's this
this group is basically planning and
zoning commissioners from across the
region that kind of talk about these
intermunicipal
land use issues.
That's what they do.
>> Are they going to be involved in the
>> They might be the uh
>> Yeah. the uh the 251 housing allocation
stuff. They they they certainly might.
Yeah. And so it's important to have a
representative there.
>> Chad, you want to do it again?
>> No. the uh so in in when I took that
position
it was because as I recall I remember
that John couldn't be the primary
>> right it needs to be
>> and so
>> town represent
>> I thought was well if John's going there
because he's involved in so many of
these towns and all this stuff that's
great um but
it just didn't suit my schedule to go to
first thing she had
and didn't have that. So,
>> look at me.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, you know, this is if nobody's if
nobody's available right now. Well, this
is something you keep on the agenda, you
know, if there's if someone's available,
but you you know, you're not forced to
appoint someone at this point.
>> All right.
What's that entail?
>> He never went to a meeting.
>> Yeah, it's it's it's basically six Zoom
meetings a year. Every other month,
third Thursday, they have a Zoom. It's
an hour, hour and a half.
>> Is it maybe evenings?
>> Yeah. 7 o'clock.
>> Well, I'd be willing to
>> maybe Bill Pen or somebody would like to
do that. Who?
>> Bill P getting involved with the town.
>> Yeah, you could. I mean, Mr. Mr. Chair,
you could, you know, appoint yourself
and and make it a point to find a find
an alternate.
>> I'll go with that unless there's any uh
disscent from the commission.
>> Wasn't you?
>> I might have been appointed the
alternate. If you want to do that, if
you want to be make yourself the
principal and I'll be the alternate, we
can do it that way.
>> That was the deal.
>> I guess I'll do that. I'll let him know.
I need to appoint someone.
>> Uh
>> then you can just appoint someone
>> uh myself.
>> I'm somebody else to in your absence.
>> In my absence. Yeah.
>> I'm happy to participate as well. I just
don't think I know enough to go there on
my own.
You
>> guys here?
>> Volunteer.
>> Jay, believe me, I I I worked with I
used to when I worked at Prague, I was
the staff for this regional planning
commission. I can guarantee you, you
will not be the least uh informed person
there.
>> Okay,
I'll make a bet on you.
>> Are you volunteering, Jay?
>> Yeah, sure.
>> All right. Uh, great. Duly appointed.
Jay is now going to be our leazison to
crop unless Leander have an objection.
>> No.
>> Okay. All right. And I'd like to appoint
John Kizkowski as our alternate.
>> That was easy. Moving on.
>> Uh just one more thing. Uh Wayne, you
can send me the information on that.
>> Yep. I'm gonna I'm gonna put you in
touch with with Jacob.
>> Okay. Thank you.
Thanks, Jay.
>> Of course.
>> All right, moving on to item 9A,
administrative reports.
>> No, you going to do the permit.
>> You're right.
>> We No, you're right. I I apologize. We
have to address that. So,
I asked advice. What did the planning a
zoning commission do last time? There
was a vacancy and you filled it.
>> I I was the one. Yeah. But there was
>> Did you put out a public notice?
>> The town clerk did.
>> Okay.
>> She has to notify the Democratic party
chair, the Republican party chair, then
put notice in the riveries.
>> Okay. Write that down.
But can't you
>> we have a letter to
um regular
>> to fill that
>> vacancy
>> that was that was not the opinion of
>> right
>> okay that is if the if an alternate
wanted to fill that position they do
that to say I'd like to fill that
position and by during that time they've
got the experience that gives
a leg up in the selection process.
>> Go ahead, Leanne. We couldn't hear you.
>> Oh, I I just had um I said, "Do we have
an actual letter?" And then I said in
this in the charter, it has to be
publicized,
you know, it it has to be um publicized
somehow to the public.
>> Very good.
In other words, we have to receive
anybody else if there's any other
interest. Um, and then our own
alternates if they were interested
would, you know, signal us of that
interest. And then we have 60 days to do
it. If for some reason we fail to do it,
then it would go to the selectman.
>> Thank you, man.
>> Yeah, I hope Ann's okay. I know people
have all kinds of reasons for resigning,
so I guess we'll just move ahead with
the procedure.
>> Yeah. Do we do we know if she's going to
stay on in the selectman role?
>> I was wondering that too. I guess we'll
have to wait, huh?
Okay. Um, so Wayne, could you draft a
letter for that or for the River East?
>> No, publicize the the opening.
>> Town Clark does that or just I could ask
town clerk to do that. Yeah, like said,
>> I think I know them.
>> Yeah,
>> sounds like a plan.
But the town clerk, well, the town clerk
obviously knows about the resignation
because she
>> told us she received the letter,
>> correct?
>> Okay. On to administrative reports.
>> All right. Um,
been a spate of complaints coming in.
Uh,
actually, uh,
more complaints. What was that word you
used? Spate. Spate.
>> I haven't heard that in a while. The
>> spate of complaints.
>> Good word.
>> It could use other words, but anyway.
So, uh,
>> a male maelstrom.
Yeah.
>> Hopefully.
>> Anyway, uh,
a tractor trailer truck being parked in
a culde-sac Lin Holers. I did speak with
the owner of the truck this morning and
uh hopefully he follows through with
finding another place to park his truck.
Um
and uh
um
>> not a zoning I I I don't I don't want to
make the meeting but zoning has some
vehicle parked in the right way. That's
not
>> Yeah, zoning has some
>> commercial vehicle though in a
residential area.
>> Residential area
that's a that's a It's actually his own
business
>> is
>> but still it's and the town doesn't have
an ordinance about parking in town
streets
>> town roads
>> in the league is commercial vehicles
right
>> zoning has commercial vehicle parked on
>> private property private property
>> he's in the town right away he's on
public propert
>> anyway I've asked him
Good for you. Good for you.
>> All right. Uh he was telling I woke him
up this morning. He was sleeping in it.
Jesus.
So
anyway, uh another complaint, Hutchinson
Road. Uh I'll have be going back there.
Um a complaint on Bear Swamp concerning
a property that is accumulating some
junk. I believe um I believe that was a
subject of a complaint some time about
>> what was the one on H
>> 81 Hutchinson
>> H
>> Yeah. What was the complaint?
>> Um the complaint is about uh
accumulation of
debris and junk and vermin dragging the
stuff from that property onto a
neighboring property
>> and one on Bear Swamp also. No, the one
on beer swab is just about stuff.
Accumulation of stuff
>> and
yeah, that's it. Oh, and complaint uh on
Bulla Road
concerning a property on Basola Road.
And what was that complaint?
>> The complaint was a a joke in cars and
stuff. Yeah. We literated the
>> in front of the house. Yeah. It must be.
That's my guess.
>> You could be right.
>> I don't like I don't like outing people
publicly if they're not here to defend
themselves. So, I try to keep it
generic.
>> Well, you all agreed to
>> I can't wait to see what you do, don't
we?
>> Excuse me.
>> Excited to see what you do.
>> Okay. Um
I think I told you this last time I've
been monitoring the inland wetland
stuff. Um been in contact with the
wetlands chair Duncan Fe.
There is an application that's going to
be brought to them at their next meeting
concerning
uh the culvert on Lake Road at
Arerendoni. The culvert replacement
>> atola.
>> Yeah.
Anyway, um
given I think I commission all the stuff
they need on that.
up to the engineer that
submitted it.
And also I this commission can expect um
an 824 referral on that claim after
weapons
and that's all I have to report. So
going back to the biza road thing. So,
we approved a home occupation
and construction of a new garage.
>> In part of that approval had instruction
construction of a new garage to put all
the stop
>> and he is
>> he has done nothing
>> to move that ball down the field.
>> There's more than there was
>> um
>> I don't know. I'll see when I go up
there visiting with individual.
It would it would be nice if we had kind
of a uh a spreadsheet of all these. You
know, we expected something to be done
as part of this thing. He's he's
looking, okay, I'm good to go with my
home occupation. No, no, he's good. He's
good to go with building the garage to
put all the stuff that supports his home
occupation.
>> He's not he hasn't he hasn't filed on
the land records yet.
>> That's my point, you know. So,
>> my point is that he hasn't even got he
he kind
go.
>> Yes. He's he's happy. He gets his whole
occupation and he's doing his thing. No,
that was predicated on on doing some
other stuff.
>> Is there like a timet or anything?
>> Well, there is, you know, I think it's
the 60 days or 90 days.
>> We can I think we can go back and revoke
the uh the home occupation that say you
have
>> Does a home occupation become effect?
Doesn't it doesn't become effective
until it's violent? Okay. Then you tell
them to get all the crap out of there.
you know the other so so that was one
thing for a spreadsheet but you know
another one that comes to mind is
>> Ben Franklin seems to be morphing into
more stuff along the rail trail where
they carve out I don't know what
>> that piece of property
>> yeah that it you know and we've been
talking about they were supposed to come
with the revised site plan about what
they're doing with the parking and all
this stuff. Uh you know, we've been
talking about that for a year or so and
uh
you know they're
working. So they just are ignoring the
fact that they're not in compliance.
>> I believe the commission or I they can
be brought before the commission.
>> Yeah. Okay.
But I think we need a way to track these
things because they kind of slip off,
>> right? There's no timelines put on it.
>> Yeah,
>> maybe the applicants aren't aren't aware
of the timelines.
>> Do they have are they operating under a
special permit or they were they were
they grant authoriz?
>> So yeah, I mean if they're if they're if
they're exceeding the the parameters of
the special permit, we should let them
know.
>> No, they don't.
Yeah. Okay.
>> But they can be brought before the
commission for Right. Sure. for not
living up to the conditions of
especially that could be revoked,
>> right?
>> All that stuff is being put in the new
building,
>> right?
>> And there's old.
>> Yeah.
How long has that been?
>> Oh god. 6 months at least.
>> Six, eight months.
>> Since he got the approval. It has been
>> excuse me. since since he got the
approval for the for the
>> he was he was approved for his home
occupation and for
constructing a a garage.
Um there were conditions put on it
though um that he had to do had to have
an official A2 site plan submitted and
stuff like that and he's got to file
that.
>> Oh, he hasn't filed it yet.
>> No, he hasn't put it on the land
records.
>> Okay. So, yeah. So,
>> so it expired. Is there any department?
Doesn't expire. It just uh
>> it just
>> it just sits. It's not active.
>> Gotcha. Right.
>> So,
I'll be going up to see.
>> Oh, also on the on the website, you guys
probably noticed that that the
application is all back up there. back
up there. Yeah,
>> the uh
>> that would be very helpful.
>> The uh
>> right
>> permit link people put a
like a disclaimer on the entry page to
the permit system that requires the user
to check a box acknowledging that they
read it so that that they know that
there's these scams out there and not
the not the fault for it. And uh
it's good.
They were prompted by many towns other
than Andover asking for something.
So they did it. Yeah. And that's the end
of my report.
>> Thank you, Wayne.
>> Um we're out of job.
>> I'm sorry.
>> Go ahead. So, well,
>> almost nothing to report because we
canceled our meeting this month because
there was nothing going on. But, uh, you
know, there was a surprise to John, I
guess, that we have no wetlands agent
for the town right this minute. And, uh,
I don't know where we stand on replacing
him, but, uh, one doesn't exist
currently. I don't know if we have a
temporary one or
>> when are you when are your speeches? the
first Tuesday of the month.
>> That's
my essence planning. I I'm I'm a I'm a
certified wetland
person. I
>> So you have more any more time in your
schedule? I don't I first Monday first
Tuesday of the month is Essex for me but
I you know but if you if you need a warm
body to write enforcement orders or to
sign out and stuff like we could talk
about that but
you know the meeting presents a conflict
point but I could you have any idea who
we could get I've been calling Tac over
there trying to get a hold of people
that could
>> Oh the conservation district.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. That's not a bad not a bad option.
Joanna should be out.
>> Do you know anybody else that might be
interested in doing
>> What is it, Wayne? 10 hours a week or
>> No, it's it's probably not that.
>> Yeah. Or five hours a week.
>> 10 hours a week.
>> 20 hours total, right? Period.
>> Um, we could look at that. My I mean,
one of my colleagues, uh, Robin Newton,
uh, who's a a planner, zoning officer,
wellness officer, lives on, uh, Bunker
Hill in Coventry.
Um maybe we could we could see if she's
willing to stop by, but we can we I you
know that we can we can talk about that.
We you know maybe have some resources.
>> She interested in being a violence
officer?
>> Oh, hell no, she's not. But you know,
but you know, if her if her boss informs
her that this is something she's going
to do, that may be something we can make
available. But yeah,
>> until we get one.
>> Yeah. So we could we could talk about
that.
>> Okay.
>> But I think, you know, reaching out to
Joanna at the conservation district is a
good idea. But filling the position is
the board of select correct.
>> Yeah. Yes.
>> We we have a lot of things going on
right now.
>> So I understand.
Thank you, Jed. Sorry about that. Moving
on. Town planner.
>> Yeah. Um I don't I don't have that much
additional. I you know um it'll be
important to have eyes and ears at
Prague uh because this you know the
state is going to be coming forward with
its uh housing numbers in the next six
months or so. Uh it's really important
to stay current with Krag on on what
their plans are with original housing.
Um
yeah, but otherwise you know
we we did our we did for those for
anyone who participated in the session
last Wednesday on on public act 251. I
know well Jen you were there. I don't
know if anyone else was there. Um
the resource the recording of the the
the um of the session is on my website.
So, if you go to tikkeypplans.com
and go to resources page, there's um the
the full PowerPoint presentation, the
full recording of the session and some
other guidance on on the public act. So,
uh I would encourage people to take a
look there and that would also account
for your training hours for that that
would give you two two training hours
for your your commissioner training
requirement.
So one of the thoughts that
so one of the big takeaways is Prague is
going to come up with a plan. The
housing growth plan is that the name of
it and
and so a town can either
accept that plan or they can come up
with their own plan, write their own.
And you know we talked about well this
is easy, this one's hard. And my thought
was,
we're probably going to be in agreement
with the plan. We just aren't going to
like the numbers that we get assigned.
>> Everyone's going to think the numbers
are too high.
>> Yeah. And so we could just we can make
it our own plan by taking
98% from the basic plan and just change
the numbers. There's two numbers in
there I think that we need to uh put and
then that's our plan. Uh,
>> but then Krog has to approve.
>> Yeah, I got we case
>> the trick is
you have to you have to make the
determination if you're going to opt in
or opt out before CRO writes the full
plan.
>> The the only thing you're going to know
really is the number before you opt in
or out. So, but if you opt out and say
you're going to write our own plan,
CRO's not going to involve you in the
original plan. So,
>> you you won't be able to get to the 99
yard line and say, "No, that's our plan
except for
>> 90%." Right. We have to tweak.
>> Yeah. So, but but this this will be, you
know,
>> basically over the next
>> year, we're going to have to have that
discussion.
>> Yeah.
So
>> now the state is has put a bunch of
money into Krag for this.
>> Yep.
>> And
>> and they're not providing any mun direct
municipality grants. So yeah, so if
you're going to write your own plan, you
have to figure out how to pay for it.
>> It would be very good.
>> That's that's the encouragement to go
with the chronic plan I guess is it's
free.
That's what I got. Thank you.
>> Okay, moving on to public speak.
No hearing. None. Moving on.
Approval of minutes.
Make a motion to approve the February
17, 2026 maintenance minutes.
>> Second.
>> Thank you, Jay. Thank you, Deb.
Discussion.
Okay, hearing none. Let's take a vote.
Approve the minutes.
All in favor? I
>> I
>> motion passes 500
>> and the next regularly scheduled meeting
is April 21st and I'd like to ask
everybody to if they can make it in come
in person that way you get to see this
cool stuff in person.
Um and
Make a motion to adjurnn. Second.
All in favor?
>> I
>> Thank you everybody. Make sure to say
that
I together.